---
layout: post
title: 2.9.5 released
tags: [release]
---

After 5 months of work, we are happy to announce that our latest and greatest
version, HexChat 2.9.5 has been released.

This version brings a very important change: due to the significant
modifications made to our build environment we no longer support Windows XP.
This means that the 2.9.5 installers will refuse to install on anything older
than Windows Vista, so XP users are advised to stick with 2.9.4 until they can
upgrade to a more up-to-date OS. It is also a good idea to disable the Update
Checker plugin by running the 2.9.4 installer again and unselecting it in the
component list.

Thanks to the fundamental changes under the hood you also have to make sure to
upgrade the spelling dictionaries to _r2_ and Perl to our own build - all can
be found on our [Downloads](http://hexchat.org/downloads.html) page under the
2.9.5 section.

Another important thing to note is that GitHub has withdrawn its Downloads
service, where our binaries were hosted. That means the Update Checker plugin
will point you to a dead link, so please get the download directly from our
site this time.

Other notable changes are:
- the source tree is now prepared for inclusion in the Debian and FreeBSD repositories
- all dependencies are recompiled in much newer versions on Windows
- HexTray is replaced with our built-in tray plugin
- URL/username detection is greatly improved
- the Ban List window is improved with new features
- all utility windows can be closed with the Esc key
- nicks in the user list can be colored
- channels with keys are now reconnected correctly

But there's even more. For a more detailed list, please refer to the
[ChangeLog](https://hexchat.readthedocs.org/en/latest/changelog.html) and for
the complete list check out the
[commit log](https://github.com/hexchat/hexchat/commits/v2.9.5).

Enjoy!

The HexChat Team
